Frae, thank you so much for joining. It's a treat. And look, you've been doing a lot of
work. You've been busy with these five forces that have been shaping the global economy. Just
to quickly go through them, money and debt, internal order and disorder, power conflict, acts
of nature, and technology. I wanna start on that first one, though, because it's a point
that you've made globally but here in The US. Seven trillion in spending, but only five trillion in
revenue. Ray, are we already past the point of no return that the fact we have
this dynamic means that some sort of crisis is inevitable? Yes. We're past the point of no
return, meaning, when debt service payments squeeze out spending, like plaque in the circulatory squeezes out
the flow of money, the flow of blood. It's the same kind of thing. It could
be measured. So we're seeing that happen. And then there's a supply and a demand issue.
The supply of one budget deficit means that debt has to be sold, and you have
a supply demand issue. And we could see it happening in the bond market, and we
could see that bonds have been a bad investment and that there's pressure in interest rates
and there's borrowing. And that's one of the five factors as you're saying. But that dynamic
is happening. People are treating it like it hasn't happened before. They don't understand
that like plaque in the arteries that it builds up and they have that exposure. So
I think when you're looking I think of a particularly vulnerable period is after the midterm
elections and before the presidential election, because as we connect these forces, we have that issue.
The debt issue. And we also are going to have a great deal of political
conflict that has implications for taxes. It has implications for all sorts of things. So what does history tell us that this
looks like when we get closer to that point? Is it yields breaching a certain level?
Is it failed auctions? What would you look for to say, the time is here. The
bond temper tantrum is finally occurring. Well, it could be seen in
either the bond market the market action. It's by long rates rising relative to short
rates. In other words, they're trying to hold the short rates down, and the long rates
are rising. And we are seeing some of that. And then you're seeing the weakening
of the dollar, and then you're seeing movements such as in gold and other assets.
And when you see that rise in rates, then that starts to affect the stock market.
Because what's happened now is that with bonds going down and stocks going up, the perspective
returns now of stocks are now down low relative to the perspective returns of bonds. And
so that upward pressure then starts to translate into a stock market pressure. That is the
classic dynamic and something that the Federal Reserve then or any central bank is in a
position of not easily being able to manage because it becomes more of a stagflationary environment.
So the stagflation that we're seeing right now, the Fed wrestles with the question if
it's tightening or if it's easing. That also has in an economy where there is such
a wealth disparity, but also think about the implications of whether you own stocks or whether
you don't own stocks and that difference. That impact is very different. That has huge
political implications. I say give it that period because this is an administration that has been
very explicit in its desire for cuts, and this is part of the reason that Kevin
Walsh is now our Fed chair, of course, has said I am independent. Do you think
throughout history, there's often been bond markets that test a Federal Reserve chair? Is Kevin Worsch
about to get a big test? Of course. One man's debts are another
man's assets. And if there's not a high enough real return, then those bonds are
not appreciated. So what are you holding the bond for? You're holding it for a
real return. So the markets ultimately the marketplace can ultimately decide whether it owns it
or not. Do you think we head to the nineteen
thirties again where it's a treasury that works with the Fed, that some of that independence
is kind of chipped away out of a necessity to keep debt servicing costs low, for
example? That's I think it's exactly headed to
that kind of thing, which we also saw a number of times through quantitative easing. It's
called financial repression, and the idea is that you drive the bond yields down with buying
of assets and so on. Sometimes it includes even foreign exchange controls to try to prevent
money from going outside the country and so on, but to have that forced low
real rates. And then that's usually accompanied by high taxation and a higher level of inflation
to bring in revenue. And because money wants to go to other things, that's when gold
has been illegalized. That's when foreign exchange controls come in and so on and so forth.
I'm not saying we're going that far, but I do think the reality is, yes, that
the bond market either is fundamentally good by providing a high enough real return to compensate
people, or it's going to be manipulated in a sense this way that will make it
unattractive. In either case, it's relatively unattractive. And so money goes elsewhere, and that's
just the way it works. You've also been very forward and very early saying
that the Strait Of Hormuz is an issue for The US. And people followed on and
said that, and now it feels like we're ignoring it. I know you've compared this to
the Suez crisis in 1956. Are we heading towards similar environment where we become Britain, where
if we can't control the Strait Of Hormuz, that is something that could also cause a
crisis of confidence in The US and US financial markets ultimately. What we're seeing now, indisputably and I'm
I travel around the world, and I speak with world leaders. I was just a month
in Asia and ten days in China and so on. And what we're seeing around the
world is the question of will The United States can The United States fight a war
in defense or an offsetting set of pressures of other powers, particularly China. And in
Asia, right now, all the leaders I spoke with would say, it's clear that
The United States cannot fight a war because the population doesn't want the cost of living
impact, that they don't want people to die. They don't want they want it to be
over fast. And also, the country can't be overextended. How can it fight a war
in The Middle East and fight a war there? It's getting overextended. Well, that fact, that
realization is having very big geopolitical implications for those who expect because it was a policy
of containment for China. There's Taiwan issue. And then around the Taiwan issue are
questions of borders and so on. There was a process of containment. That's
over pretty much. And so, as a result of that, there's a dynamic. Taiwan and Taiwan's
very serious case because it's not just political. It's chips. And for example, it's entirely within the power of the Chinese
government to basically say, let's take, let's put a blockade or and let's have a
week of no chips out coming out. Let's just imagine that that signal was given to
the market that all the tech all the stocks, AI stocks, and everything would crash. The
stock market would crash. Yes. And considering how high we're coming from,
I would kinda love to combine these ideas because on one hand, you have the spending
we're already doing. War has been incredibly expensive. That's more spending from The US. And then
there's AI and the desire for AI sovereignty. Debt markets are being flooded with AI. Alphabet
raising their debt, their equity offering to eighty five billion. Are you concerned that there's a crowding out
happening in this market? Can we handle that amount that's coming? All great technology changes produce bubbles. And the reason
they produce bubbles is because nobody can get it exactly right. There you have
to either spend a ton of money to capture your market share and so on. And
don't worry about whether it's too much or not. Or you don't spend enough
money and you lose your market share. And it's very imprecise with a lot of competition.
And then when people bet on the technology, which I'll bet on the technology, but
they think that buying the stocks is betting on the technologies, which is a different thing
because the stocks can be expensive and so on. That's a problem. And what happens
is when wealth grows a lot relative to incomes I wanna distinguish wealth from incomes.
Wealth is you can create wealth very easily in the following way. You say I'm gonna
have a raise fifty million, fifty million on a billion dollar valuation. That's counted as a billion
dollars of money, and now you're a billionaire, but you only put up fifty million. And
so wealth, you cannot spend wealth. Wealth is you have to sell wealth to get money
because you can only spend money. So when there's a lot of wealth relative to the
amount of money there is, there is a vulnerability and bubbles burst when money when wealth
needs to be converted into money. Well, what is the trigger for that? Often that's because of debt,
but it could be for anything. It could be for wealth taxes, for example. Supposing you
put in wealth taxes, then those people who have wealth are going to have to sell
some of that wealth to pay taxes. That dynamic that I'm talking about accompanies the
miracle technologies that over a period of time have wonderful implications for productivity. So I don't
think it has a problem with productivity. I do think that productivity, it has a big wealth gap implication. A very small percentage of the population is gonna do unbelievably,
and a lot of people won't. So what do we do? Can we work together politically
to deal with those issues, and how do you Are you optimistic? I do not
believe I'm not optimistic on us working together to solve. So what's the end? Is
it a bubble that bursts eventually? So I think it is. Yes.
And then that moment, there's always the issue of a bubble, and we can measure a
bubble. I have indicators, and that there's how many people are over owned, what's the
sentiment, a lot of indicators for bubble. And we are right now rising close to, closer
to, not at, the same level in 2000 and same level in 1929. Specific level where you say, oh, no. Here's
the one that we really need to worry about. The thing about it is there's
two parts to it. There is, quote, a bubble, and then there's the pricking of the
bubble. And the pricking of the bubble happens when there's a need for wealth to be
sold to get the money, like, normally in a dynamic of a debt problem. If
you take Japanese bubble, take the 29 bubble, take the 2000 bubble. All of them have
an element of tightening money because it can't go on forever. It'll
find its bubble. The question is how long you let the bubble go before there's the
pricking. So in order to do the market timing, to know how to market time, it
requires both the understanding of the bubble and the looking for the pricking, and the pricking
is the converting of wealth into money because I need money in order but I have
wealth, but so I have to sell some of the wealth in order to get the
money. That's how it works. That dynamic is following that kind of path even though it's
a wonderful technology that'll have great. Ray, we could talk about this all day.
